aloud is presented by the California
Institute for Human Science. Okay. And
then we'll shut that and then I'm going
to go ahead and share my
screen. Is it not minimizing? There we
go.
And so as of this moment, announcements
are being sent out to of our
followers and they'll be logging in and
so they'll be able to hear everything we
say and their screen will sort of look
like this. They'll see little thumbnails
of our images. Mhm.
So, in just a minute, I'll start the
countdown clock timer. And then for
those listening and joining, welcome and
thank you for being with us. If you want
to chat in where you're joining from in
the world, from your neck of the word,
uh, neck of the woods in the world, we'd
love to hear where you're from. And then
in just a minute, I'll start the timer.
I might mention um for people who are
watching the archival video and they're
wondering why do they have to sit
through 10 minutes of our conversation
beforehand before we begin the program.
And it's because once we start the timer
and go live, uh YouTube automatically
makes this archival
recording which YouTube then takes
public. So, uh I suppose the option
would be uh for us to capture a
recording on um on our hard drive and
then edit it before we let it go public.
So, in theory, we could edit out the
first 10 minutes because I I got a
complaint from a viewer who who was
unhappy that uh they had to at least
they didn't understand they could fast
forward, I suppose, to the beginning of
the uh video. So, for viewers who who
don't want to sit through our
preliminary conversation, fast forward
at 10 minutes, right? That's why there's
a timer. It says 9 minutes until live
stream.
But this is yeah to give a notification
so that our subscribers will be notified
that we're going live in a few minutes.
And if we were to take it down and
re-upload it, the only thing is is that
we've already shared this particular URL
all over the internet. So then we would
lose this particular UR. Yeah. Would
have to have a new URL. I I kind of like
keeping things the way they are. Yeah.
because I if I were to start downloading
the it and we're on Zoom, it's a Zoom
video which is not the highest quality
from the Zoom recorder to be honest. And
then I would want to anytime you mention
another person, I would want to insert a
book cover or something the way we
normally do for our interviews, which
would create additional delays. But this
way the archival video goes up as soon
as we finish talking. Yeah, it's pretty
easy just to
Yeah. fast forward a YouTube video to
when it actually begins. And typically
by the time the day is over, there are
three or four times as many people who
watch the archival video as who were
with us live.
How many years have you been doing this,
Jeffrey? I started in
1972 doing interviews but the YouTube
channel this is our 10th year on
YouTube. Okay. I began KPFA radio
Pacifica radio nonprofit station in
Berkeley back in 1972.
That's a lot of good information
streamed out to a lot of people.
Yeah. Really?
And and I was guided to do it uh by a
dream. Really? Yes. Yeah. At at a time
in my life when I didn't own a radio or
a television and I was a long-haired
Berkeley hippie, I didn't believe in
radio or television. I thought they were
all phony baloney. But I had this dream
and I acted on it and changed my mind
and I've for most of the ra last half
century I've been doing interviews. Wow,
that's fascinating. Another example of
the wisdom of the deep consciousness of
the world communicating and giving uh us
directions in our private lives, our
so-called private lives. Yeah.
Yeah.
And I'm very interested in in people who
have had what I would call lifech
changing dreams.
Uh because that that dream that I had
was a lifecher. I mean here I am half a
century later still acting on that
information.
Yeah. Yeah.
and live streams have been on YouTube
have been what three four years Jeffoff
you've been doing these
yeah um maybe
even I think maybe five years yeah in
fact yes five years
yeah like usually every two to three
weeks we have fabulous guests on like
you Chris
and how did you get into this particular
role. Emmy, what drew you here?
Well, Jeff was a guest on my podcast
back in 2018.
And I originally learned about him and
Thinking Aloud on public television back
in
1987 when I was probably 13 years old.
And he was Yeah. uh interviewing
wonderful people back even even then on
public television from 1986 to 2002.
Although my understanding was is that it
was sent out to on the the satellite in
1987. So I began watching it and was
just fascinated and very intrigued with
the information. I didn't understand all
of it at the time because I was 13, but
I understood enough that I wanted to
learn more. And in retrospect, I think
it really did help set the tone for my
career in understanding more about
holistic health, intuition,
spirituality, consciousness, and even
back then, Jeff, you were talking about
UFOs and interviewing people like Jacqu
Valet and John Mack and
and I thought, well, this man is really
intelligent. There must be something to
all of this. Yeah. And then I was
researching for a book I wrote and about
intuition and Jeff's name kept coming up
and then I realized, oh, Jeffrey
Michishlov, he was the host of that
program. And then I realized he had a
doctorate in parasychology, which was
very downplayed on that original
program. And and then I thought, well,
I'd love to talk to him and I'll invite
him on my podcast.
And he said yes. And then in 2020, Jeff,
you put out a call for
volunteers and then I started
volunteering with you and then he won
the Bigalow essay competition for the
best evidence for the continuation of
consciousness in the afterlife in 2021.
So, he invited me to be a guest host and
then shortly thereafter I became the
co-host and then now he's invited other
guest hosts and yeah, I'm just grateful
to be here and help share this
information and learn from one of the
best best people in the field doing this
in such in such a way our lives are all
intertwined around each other, aren't
they? Yeah. Yeah. Very true. Yeah.
And Chris, I know we're going to learn
more about you in a few minutes. When
did you start I know you've been you
were a professor for many many years.
When did you start public speaking or
getting interested in these kind of
topics?
Well, you know, when I started the LSD
work in 79, I had to keep it pretty
under tight wraps. I mean, I just
couldn't bring it out publicly at all.
And it wasn't until I wrote Dark Knight
Early Dawn, which was my first book on
psychedelic work, um, which which came
out in 2000, that I began going to
conferences and began to teach at CIS in
that area. But I really didn't go public
until I retired from the university in
2013.
And um then I you know I was working on
LSD in the mind of the universe for five
years during that period. And when it
finally came out in 2019 I became I was
more public just increasingly public. So
I was out of the psychedelic closet
formally kind of when that book came
out. Yeah. Yeah.
And it's a wonderful book. Thank you.
LSD and the mind of the universe. I
really enjoyed reading it and I like how
you also put many of your session notes
in there which was you kind of you bring
the reader. I felt like I was sometimes
along on the trip with you. Yeah, that's
what I wanted to do. My sense was that
in order to have the philosophical
conversation about the potential of
psychedelics, first people have to
understand what happens in deep
sessions. So the first task was
descriptive and then later the second or
third round would be more evaluative and
analytic. Uh so I I really tried to
bring the reader along with me into
those sessions. So I had to learn a
whole new way of writing. I had to lose
my academic
uh voice and develop a different voice.
Well, you did it beautifully. I I would
say you nailed it. Thank you.
Yeah. So we just got about a minute
before we officially begin the
program. I think in retrospect that u
the impulse that I had to act on that
dream and and to be alert to it and so
on. I was primed for that uh from having
had LSD a number of times prior.
Yeah.
Yeah. And we the depth of our
interweaving continues to go. Yeah. Mhm.
All right, welcome everybody. I'm
Jeffrey Michionlo. I'm with my co-host
Emmy Vades and our honored guest Chris
Bich. And Emmy, will you introduce
Chris? Yes. Hello and welcome everybody.
We're so grateful to have Chris Bash
with us today who is professor emmeritus
in the department of philosophy and
religious study studies at Youngstone
State University in Ohio where he taught
for 33 years. He is also adjunct faculty
at the California Institute of Integral
Studies emmeritus excuse me ameritus
fellow at the Institute of Noetic
Sciences and on the advisory council of
gra legacy training. Chris is author of
Life Cycles: Reincarnation in the Web of
Life, Dark Knight, Early Dawn, The
Living Classroom: Teaching and
Collective Consciousness, and LSD and
the Mind of the Universe, Diamonds from
Heaven. And his website is
chrisb.com with an E at the
end. Welcome, Chris. We're so happy to
have you here today. to get us started.
Do you want to just go ahead and share a
little bit about your background? And we
also want to let people know that Chris
has been a guest on New Thinking Aloud
with a recorded interview talking about
psychedelics and the cosmic mind.
Well, uh I'm actually the last person
you would have thought from the
beginning of my life to end up um
writing a book on uh describing what
happens on a long series of highdosese
LSD sessions. I was raised in the deep
south in Mississippi. I was a a
seminarian in the early days. I was
studying to be a Catholic priest, but
eventually I left that uh because
celibacy and I didn't get along very
well.
uh got degrees in theology and New
Testament criticism and eventually uh
philosophy of religion from Brown
University. So I had a very classical
very traditional upbringing. Uh I the
the psychedelic 60s passed me by
entirely. Uh and it wasn't until I got
to graduate school. I mean I got to
teaching in
1978 and I was looking around for where
to take my research that I encountered
the work of Stannislav Gr and his book
Realms of the Human Unconscious was a
lifecher for me because I saw
immediately the philosophical
significance of his work. If what he was
saying was true, it had profound
implications for how we could do
philosophy in the future. not just
healing but actually explore the
metaphysical structure underlying
structure of
reality. So um uncomfortably I made the
decision to I knew I needed to do this
work. I knew I had to begin my own
psychedelic work and I was uncomfortable
breaking the law but I chose to begin
very private circumscribed work uh in
this modality using Stan Gross protocol.
So I divided my life into two parts.
During my day job, I was a traditional
member of the department of philosophy
and religious studies at Youngtown
State. And kind of my night job was
doing working with psychedelics,
exploring the I was healing my own
psyche, working in exploring the deep
structure of the collective psyche and
then what lies beyond the collective
psyche. And I worked for four years. I
stopped for six years for reasons that I
give in the book. And then I resumed for
another 10 years. So basically between
the time when I was 30 and 50 years old,
I did 73 highdosese LSD sessions using a
tight therapeutic protocol. Uh and then
I took another 20 years to digest and
assimilate those experiences and to kind
of connect the dots in those experiences
before publishing um LSD in the mind of
the universe in 2019.
So uh actually it was after I finished
my sessions in one of my meditations uh
I heard this voice say 20 years in 20
years out which I took to mean that it
would take me at least 20 years to
integrate and digest all the experiences
that I had collected in those 20 years.
Now, now I think that might have been an
overly optimistic assessment because I
don't think I have nearly integrated all
the experiences that I had collected in
those first 20 years.
Wow. So, you feel like you're still
integrating the experiences? Very much
so. In fact, it it raises it's has
raised substantial kind of intellectual
uh questions. How do you possibly
integrate
experiences which so radically transcend
the conditions of time and space and our
consciousness inside time and space? If
you have temporary experiences which go
radically beyond spatial consciousness,
radically beyond temporal consciousness
and linear time, how do you in what does
it mean even to integrate those
experiences? I mean, it really comes
down the things I'm thinking about these
days is what does integration even look
like? What does it mean when you're
dealing with such radical experiences?
If you're dealing with lower dose work
or gentler psychedelics where the
experiences come closer to your world
inside time and space, integration is
less demanding. But if you really open
up to the very deep waters of the deep
psyche, integration becomes a more
substantive issue.
All right. Well, we're getting lots of
questions coming in. And I think this
question from Robert Bushman might be a
a good place to start perhaps is what is
consciousness? Is there an ultimate
reality or is it infinitely fractal? I
guess there's a few questions in here.
How can an individual's conscious
awareness expand without psychedelics?
How can one remember past lives, which
actually is a maybe a separate question,
but maybe starting out with what is
consciousness?
Yeah. Well, you know, I'm happy to let
the psychologists and philosophers tear
their hair out on that one. I'm willing
to sort of go with whatever definition
they come up with as long as it's
sufficiently broad to incorporate the
total phenomenology of consciousness. I
mean sort of simply con consciousness
comes from conscio to know with
consciousness is that with which we
know. So it is the knowing function. It
is the awareness of our cognitive
capacity through which we know anything
else. Um and
so again then we ask the question well
how big is consciousness? We have a
tendency to think that consciousness
kind of fits inside our skull. But now
increasingly we realize that's not an
adequate understanding because of all
sorts of empirical parasych
parasychological research. So I think of
it more as u consciousness is a field uh
that our brain allows us to consolidate
and and structure inside our physical
existence. But consciousness in its own
right is an field and being a field it's
open-ended and it's then if you ask how
big is that field then we get into the
real cosmological adventure because uh
we find at least I found that in if you
really go deep into your psyche you drop
first into the personal unconscious into
your personal psyche if you keep pushing
deeper you drop into the collective
psyche the territory Tory Jung
described, but you can go deeper than
that and drop below the entire psyche of
the of the human species. you can
transcend the species psyche and then
you're in a you're in dimensions of
consciousness that truly
um I think of it as the either the mind
of God or I prefer to think of it as the
mind of the universe that as vast as the
universe is you know and we know we have
a rough approximation of how many
billions of galaxies are in the universe
and how huge it is how old it
is that consciousness that this universe
has a mind and the mind is as deep and
broad and old as the universe's body is.
So that my individual experience of
consciousness is a simple drop a fractal
aspect of the totality of consciousness
that flows. And that's why I gave the
book the title LSD and the mind of the
universe. Because when you go very deep
using a very powerful and circumscribed
protocol, you drop into deeper and
deeper layers and you're given the
opportunity to explore the very nature
of
of physical reality itself. I think we
just lost your video, Chris. I lost the
video here. Let's see what's We have the
audio.
Okay, let me see if I can get as if the
camera is pointing somewhere else. Yeah,
let me see if I don't know why it
dropped, but I can shift to a different
camera. There we go. Okay, there's a
we've got you. We've got a view of you
now. Here. So, okay, wonderful. Okay,
good. You are back. Well, I think it's
important to emphasize uh early on in
our discussion or to repeat what you
said in your earlier interview with Emmy
that you are not recommending that other
people do what you did, take many uh
high doses of LSD that way. And uh I
know one of our viewers has raised the
question about uh what kind of people or
what populations of people should not
use psychedelics.
First I absolutely agree. I mean I
really do not recommend that people
adopt the protocol that I adopted
knowing what I know at the end of this
journey. I if I were starting it from
scratch I would be much gentler on
myself. I would work with much lower
doses. I would balance uh the organic
psychedelics with the synthetic
psychedelics and I just would take a
much gentler approach in u but I was
young when I did this work. I had a a
number of assumptions that I was making
that turned out not to be accurate. Um
and I would just be much gentler and uh
much more circumscribed in the project.
And there are many many people types of
people who who shouldn't be working with
psychedelics.
um they're for either physiological
reasons or psychological reasons to work
with the amplifying quality. I mean
psychedelics are amplifiers of
consciousness. They take what is far
away and make it available to you and
they take what is low volume and make it
higher volume. So it it's a tremendous
kind of inversion, an explosion of
awareness. And if you are prepared for
it, if you have the discipline for it,
and if you have the training to navigate
those transitions, and if you're working
with professionals who can help you
navigate, okay, but um there are a lot
of people I think are best based and
probably the majority of people are best
kind of working um in gentler
techniques, yoga and meditation or
transdancing, a number of things which
have the same amplifying effect in a
more gentle fashion uh which do in which
we can do a great deal of very good work
without taking uh psychedelics at all.
In fact, in the mail that I've gotten
from my writing on psychedelics, they
many of the people who have written me
have never taken psychedelics or they've
taken psychedelics once or twice early
in their life, but they've been a
meditator for 50 or 50 years and they
are engaging the cosmology that emerges
in my story and comparing it to the
cosmology that has emerged for them in
their meditative experience and finding
strong parallels. And so the at the
deepest level the issue is not
psychedelics. The issue is consciousness
the boundaries and and the functions of
consciousness itself. So but some people
should kind of stay away from these
powerful amplifiers. Yeah. And how
many micrograms or what was the dose
that you were usually working at?
Because I know after we did that
interview, people were some people were
chatting in and asking what those levels
were and I think you like you said you
would go lower if you were to do it over
again. After the first three sessions,
which are medium dose sessions, I worked
at 500 to 600 micrograms, which is right
at the body's maximum um capacity to
absorb if meaning if you took more, you
don't necessarily go deeper, more less.
Uh so I was working at at very high
levels that basically have the potential
to just shatter the you know the
structures of consciousness and take you
temporarily beyond your traditional uh
ways of knowing yourself uh and knowing
the world and
again I would be much gentler in the
early days stand differentiates between
psychotherapy
layer over up to And but at Spring Grove
they experimented with uh working with a
population of clients who were dying of
cancer. They were they were terminal
patients and they were trying to address
death anxiety and they worked with
highdosese LSD sessions essentially
trying to trigger a near-death
experience so these people could have an
insight into where they were going and
therefore relieve the anxiety of death
and it was quite successful but the
protocol limited highdosese work to
three
sessions and I came along after years
later and I thought well uh if you could
work success uccessfully three times,
you could do it more than three times.
Uh, and so I adopted that protocol and
eventually in time I learned I had a a
capacity in an aptitude for working at
those levels. I could I could let go and
expand
into the deep psyche comfortably enough.
And I also did not have problems
consolidating. I tended to consolidate
comfortably and strongly. Uh and it's
just it's it is an unusual uh an
unusually intense protocol. I wouldn't
do it again. I'd do it differently.
Yeah. In fact, you have shared, I
believe, in your book and when we had
our previous conversation, that
near-death experiencers are the group of
people you often relate to with your own
experiences with LSD. Is that right?
Yeah. I feel the closest in some ways to
people who have near-death experiences
of any population. Uh because by when
their body almost dies, they are
catapulted into very deep states of
consciousness. They get glimpses of the
world. They engage the world. And I
think um there's a strong overlap
between what happens in a deep
near-death experience and what happens
in a deep psychedelic therapeutically
structured experience. The difference is
that primarily near-death people get
only one take on that reality. And if
you work with psychedelics like I have,
you get multiple immersions, multiple
initiations into that reality. So that
what becomes a
flashing one-time exposure becomes a
journey and becomes a a communion that
is repeated and deepened over time.
Yeah. Oops. Dumping that. Okay. We have
a question from a viewer whose YouTube
name is Greasy Slick who would like to
know if you've ever experimented with
DMT, which is considered, I believe, the
most powerful psychedelic.
I have experience with other
psychedelics other than LSD. Though I
consider my LSD work to be my primary uh
body of work. I've I have had some
experiences with DMT U of course and and
MDMA and Salvia Dorum and San Pedro. Um
I've had experiences with 5MO DMT which
is an extremely powerful uh short acting
psychedelic. I don't have a lot of
experiences with 5MOD DMT. I feel like
I'm just beginning to nibble uh on that
uh after a long period of not working
with psychedelics because I stopped my
work primarily in 1999 and and much of
my work with these other psychedelics
came after 1999 when I wasn't so much
concerned with pushing new boundaries. I
was concerned with helping me integrate
the work that I had already done. Uh but
yeah, 5me DMT is an extraordinarily um
powerful and provocative
uh psychedelic and I've had limited
experience with ketamine, the highdosese
ketamine sessions. Yeah. Are you able to
draw any meaningful comparisons between
those and theens and LSD?
Well, that's a conversation we have to
go into very carefully. And I don't
think I have enough experience to really
uh and I don't have enough knowledge of
other people's experiences to be able to
make a fair comparison at this time. Uh
I do think that um there is a certain
advantage to uh psychedelics that open a
long window uh a window that stays open
for a long period of time like LSD or
maybe a little less
psilocybin where if you're dealing with
something like 5me DMT it's a very very
intense immersion but it's a very short
acting a very short window and you don't
have as much time for the infinite
consciousness that you're accessing or
entering into communion with to to
impact you and to clean you and to
transform your life. And I think this is
what Rick Strossman found in his book um
on DMT the spirit molecule where he took
people with DMT into very intense
experiences and some of them had very
deep experiences but in the end he found
that they did not change their lives
very much. these experiences were not
deeply transformative and I personally
think that part of the reason is because
it is so short acting uh versus a long
acting large window. But then again uh
even a a psychedelic like LSD relatively
speaking is relatively short acting in
terms of compared to other meditational
practices for example where the window
is open for a much longer period of
time. So if we combine
uh meditation and contemplative and
yogic disciplines with the psychedelic
practices which give you a window to
experience then you have I think maybe
the optimal conditions for balancing the
virtues of one and the virtues of the
other uh and amplifying the
transformative effect.
Yeah. wonder offhand how many people who
do take LSD and it's been widely used in
our culture. How many of those people
really have had their lives transformed
uh the way you have and I think I have
to say the way I have but I'm under the
impression that many many people of our
generation took LSD and they weren't
even trying to transform their lives.
it was more a question of partying.
Yeah, I think that's the case and uh and
nothing wrong with that. I you know I
have no criticism of that but it is to
me a kind of a wasted
opportunity. It so much hinges the to me
the productivity of these really for
philosophical exploration or therapeutic
applications depends on how you handle
these precious hours of band awareness.
If you kind stay in touch physical world
and you're having a time, you're at a
concert or you're in nature or you're
with some friends, then that lends
itself to a certain kind of millure, a
certain level of encounter. But if you
isolate yourself, if you adopt kind of a
a zazen atmosphere, if you create a ka
of practice where you're isolated from
the world, you're wearing eye shades, so
you know that whatever you're
experiencing is coming only from within
yourself. And if you engage that with,
you know, conscious intention, singular
intent and allow it to take you where it
wants to take you, which is often not
where you would like to go. It takes you
into the places that you hurt the most.
And then it takes you into places that
you don't even understand why it hurts
so much when you're going into it
because you're going beyond the edge of
the maps of the personal psyche. But if
you focus it with that intent then uh
something very exciting uh opens up as a
possibility uh because you you not only
have the opportunity to heal all these
knots that are kind of locked in your
heart from however many incarnations
you've had but you also as these kind of
are healed and are unlocked your
receptivity to the larger fields of
consciousness which are always there
always, you know, bringing that their
energy to us, uh, increases and that
really that I think is worth a hell of a
lot of concerts, you know.
Yeah. Chris, can you expand a little bit
more about what your session structures
were like?
Because somebody commented in the
conversation that we had. They asked why
didn't he just go out and hang out in
the mountains and nature and and how you
had somebody there with you as well and
I think you looked to Stannis Grath for
how to go about that is that right yeah
I you know I was Stan's work is so
formidable and his intellectual
synthesis of so many traditions is so
important that he became my kind of
foundation for doing this work. And
again, remember, I was I was doing this
work in Ohio. I was a long way from San
Francisco. I was not part of a
psychedelic community. I was not part of
an Iawaska group that going down to Peru
regularly to work with indigenous
shamans there. I was really working
alone. And I adopted the protocol that
Stan had outlined um in his book LSD
psychotherapy published in 1980, right
in the very early years of my work. And
so my protocol and first I think it's
it's wonderful to to go sit in nature
and do a low or moderate dose of
psychedelics and enter into that kind of
communion that can open. It's just not
what I did. Um so my days would always
start early in the morning. Uh I would
have everything set up. I would be
either at a third floor of our home or
later when we started having children.
and I worked in my wife's office. Carol
was a clinical psychologist and she was
my sitter for all of my sessions. So, we
would start in the early morning. I
would do meditation, yoga, body
stretching and whatnot. And then we
would begin the session. Uh they were
all guided with very carefully selected
music so that Carol had a library of
music available to her because you want
to pace the rhythm of the open the full
and the decline of the session.
Different types of music are appropriate
for different stages of that process.
And you can get lots of examples of this
music from holotropic breath work sites
which often catalog extensive libraries
for this type of work. So basically I
would spend all day uh lying down with
eye shades and the only way my sitter
primarily related to me was through the
music. Uh one time I took we took a a
movie camera and set it up to see if it
would be interesting. But actually it
was frightfully boring because it's all
the action is taking place inside. It
doesn't show much on the outside except
periodically throwing up which is you
know not that great to watch
but so all day and then usually by mid
late afternoon uh session is wrapping up
but even after the session the formal
session wraps up the tail is still very
long and I learned that you have to give
a lot of space a lot of time uh because
that you're it's a the long tail is a
good opportunity to reflect upon and to
integrate the insights that's emerged
because these insights can come and they
can be very powerful but like a dream
you can lose them.
uh and it's important to hold on to them
as well as you can. And so my custom was
the day after a session, the next
morning I would spend that morning as
long as it took to write out an complete
as thorough an account of each session.
And I found that uh I had to develop a a
strategy for sort of maximizing recall.
I began I would take the playlist that
was used in the session in exactly the
order in which the music was played
because my sitter had kept a record and
then I would play the music while I was
writing and I would play each piece of
music over and over till I felt I had
captured as best I could what happened
during that part of the m session. And
then I went on to the next piece of
music and the next piece of music so
that by the time I was finished I had as
reliable an account as I could create uh
of the session. And once it's in like
that, once it's locked in, I don't
change it. It's it's locked. Um, and I
found that if I attempted to make
improvements on the text, uh, later, my
improvements often diluted aspects or
they took the sharp edge off of the
focus. So, I basically respect the the
text, the the sessions as my primary
text. And that's why in my book uh all
the sessions are produced in a italic
text to separate them from the
commentation commentator that commentate
com that take that I put after the
session. Yeah. Well, that's fascinating.
I believe in psychological terms it's
called state dependent memory where you
so you were using your music that you
were listening to during the session to
help recall experience because day after
you're sort of one foot in one foot out
you know you're and it it's what I call
kind of standing at the edge of the well
you're you're one foot in and one foot
out and by playing the music while you
have your cognitive capacities back you
can let your mind go back into that
territory and capture it. Yeah.
Yeah. Have a question here. A couple of
people have raised it in different ways
and it has to do with the way we titled
this program using your phrase diamond
luminosity. So, one of our viewers,
Celia Funk, who is also one of our
volunteers, uh, and just had a baby
recently. Congratulations.
Congratulations. Uh she says, "This may
be a silly question, but does the title
diamond luminosity refer to actual
diamonds?" And then a a different viewer
asks, "Well, is it related to the
Diamond Sutra?"
Yeah, that's not a silly question at
all.
Um let me a little bit of background.
The phrase diamond luminosity points to
states of consciousness that I entered
in the last five years of my work. So I
had already gone through kind of what
Stan Gra calls the perinatal process and
gone through a really solid ego death.
I'd gone into um what I came to call
later the ocean of suffering working at
the collective psyche level. I'd gone
into archetypal reality. I'd gone into
causal level reality. many adventures um
in that process and I was feeling
absolutely
philosophically satiated and complete by
that time because I'd been I was having
experiences of profound oneness with
existence and even touching the
metacosmic void
and having standing under the waterfall
of cosmic love. So I was existentially
very
satisfied. But in the last 5 years and
26 sessions, I was catapulted after one
more series of death and rebirth
experiences into a state of
consciousness that was
light but exceptionally pure,
exceptionally clear light clear beyond
imagination. Now I had accessed light
many times before. When you have a an
ego death experience or you have other
deep experiences, many people encounter
the light and it's the light is kind of
the signature of these radically
expanded divine states of
consciousness. But when I talk about
diamond luminosity, I'm trying to
describe a particular state of
consciousness, a hyper hyper clear clear
state of consciousness. And because I
know the Buddhist literature better than
other spiritual traditions, at least the
mystical side of it, uh I correlate it
with what the Buddhists call Dharmakaya,
the clear light of absolute reality. It
is the the foundational metaphysical
structure. It is the the light out of
which the big bang emerges and gives
birth to the entire physical universe.
So it was hyper clear and so it doesn't
have anything to do with physical
diamonds but it does have something to
do with what the diamond sutra is
talking about and vadriana Buddhism is
vadra diamond so the diamond it's a
diamond and there is a at least other
also talk about this
diamondesque luminosity but I know it
best from reading the the Buddhist
sources uh about this reality. Uh, and
it seems to me that um it correlates
with what are described in the tantras
and in the vadriana sutras of the d of
the dharmicaya.
Beautiful. Yeah.
There's a question here from Megan Salar
who you've mentioned this a few times
about
meditation and she says he talks about
the importance of meditation and work
outside of the psychedelic work. What
does his daily practice look like or
what would he recommend?
Well, the longer that I worked with
psychedelics, the more I appreciated how
important it is to have a daily
spiritual practice. Because when you go
into psychedelics conscientiously, you
open your system up to a vast field of
consciousness
uh progressively deeper and deeper,
larger and larger and and you open
yourself up to enormous flows of energy
because I I found that each step into a
deeper state of consciousness was a step
into a higher level of energy. And to
stabilize consciousness at that higher
level, you have to acclimate to the high
level of energy that's involved, which
requires
intense, hard to describe, but very
intense purification
processes, which often have the form of
fire and solar flares and volcanic just
tremendous fire energy to transform your
being. So that you can become a being
who can live for hours at a time at that
very very deep level of consciousness
where the world works at this level in
causal level reality where it it's a
it's a different physics. It's a
different landscape of consciousness
than lower levels of consciousness where
you have you still have individual
beings doing individual things and
having individual experiences.
So when you open up to these deep levels
and then after it's over, you come back
into your ordinary
consciousness, I find that it's really
important to have a daily spiritual
practice to anchor you to help keep your
feet uh solid on the ground and also
because um the skills that are acquired
in a meditative practice in vipasina
practice or zazen practice are precisely
the kind of skills of observations and
non-attachment which you also use in a
psychedelic session. So they reinforce
each other structurally but meditation
gives you an environment to process some
of the content the cognit content of
your temporary sessions but also it
gives you an environment uh to process
the energy which is ignited and set
loose in your psychedelic sessions. So
that in the chapter on diamond
luminosity I talk about uh my work on
integrating vajadriana practice with my
psychedelic practice and I actually
didn't begin the vadriana practice until
about the same time I was entering the
diamond luminosity and it was Carol who
brought me into the vadriana tradition
uh because she did a vadriana practice
chud for
me before one of my psychedelic sessions
and the window that opened in that
session, this is the 45th session. So I
was had a lot of history by that time,
but the window that opened was wider,
deeper, and it stayed open longer than
had been the case in earlier sessions.
So I immediately learned that practice
and began to do that practice before any
psychedelic session. I would never go
into psychedelic space without doing
chud, which is a cleansing. It means
cutting. It's a cleansing practice. Um,
and I found
that when I was working at these very
very high energetic levels, it sometimes
set in motion processes which are very
difficult to integrate. Uh, processes my
subtle energy system. If you know Alex
Gay's work and you you see how
beautifully he depicts the powerful
energies that are triggered in deep
psychedelic work after the session is
over they can leave your system feeling
quite achy and and sort of stretched. Um
and I found that doing vajadriana
practice, doing the guru yoga practices
or deity yoga practices gave that energy
a place to run uh when I was back in my
ordinary consciousness back in my
ordinary body. So for lots of reasons
both for uh clarification of cognitive
content for practicing the teachings
that are given to you in your
psychedelic sessions uh for managing the
energetic consequences of entering into
those states. I think a daily spiritual
practice is really important and I would
mention that before I go would go into a
psychedelic space. Uh I would always you
I would change my psych my spiritual
practice for days and weeks before going
into the session and then I would do
different practices coming out of the
session. I would be doing kind of soul
integration practices after a session
and more cutting clearing practices
before the session. So there's a lot of
subtlety in in practices and I would do
yoga. I would basically because I would
want my body to be as clear and align as
possible if I would come to these states
and I would also for example make sure
get a chiropractor if I needed to
because if your if your body is
misaligned structurally or muscularly or
emotionally uh that's and you amp your
energy up then those blocks are going to
be amplified and become problematic. So
good personal hygiene, uh good care of
your body, care of your of yoga, uh care
of your mind,
meditation before and after. Uh I think
these are all just good hygiene
practices. Um and so my what I do for my
daily practice has changed over time. Uh
I've been a meditator for a long time,
worked in the Vadriana tradition for a
long time.
though I I do find
that one of the places because I'm a
talker because I'm an academic and
because I like to explain things I find
teaching uh is actually has become a
spiritual art form for me uh because to
enter to try to bring these ideas
spiritual ideas to make them available
to enter into dialogue with students day
after day week after week that requires
a a uh or it invites a kind of a a
existential posture, a spiritual
posture. It's very demanding kind of
work if you're really going to engage
students at this very deep existential
level. So for me, teaching is is its own
form uh a very demanding form of
spiritual practice. Yeah. A thank you
for teaching and sharing with all of us
here. I may have asked you in the
interview we did, Chris, I don't see any
questions at the moment coming through
quite the same way and I know this could
be a long answer, but if what what is it
that you felt you learned from these
sessions? What is it that Yeah. that is
so important that you think our viewers
and listeners might benefit from?
Yeah, you know that that is a a large
topic.
Uh and the challenge of trying to answer
that
question
is doing justice to how many layers of
consciousness I went through over this
20-year journey. Many of our important
books on psychedelics are based on a
much smaller number of sessions and that
tends to create expectations which
shrinks the metaphysical window. So that
Aldis Huxley's book um the doors of
perception he wrote after only one
session one uh masculine session and
Houston Smith's book cleansing the doors
of perception where he gathered a
lifetime of writing on psychedelics. He
had only done LSD six times and after
that he said the bummers increased and
he decided to take Alan Watts's advice
once you get the message hang up the
phone but that suggest that the only
kind of one or small number of messages
that might show up which may be the case
in a couple of
sessions the challenging trying to
describe what I learned from it is um
first trying to describe the many states
stages of initiation that took place uh
going from personal to collective to
incre to subtler and causal levels of
reality and and non-duality.
So a reporter asked me that question one
time and I I made a list of the things
which were the highlighted and I
included it in the in the last chapter
of the book and I can't remember all the
things now so I'll just try to
approximate my memory.
I discovered that
um underlying all existence is a
singular intelligence of unbelievable
magnitude of genius and unbelievable
intelligence. Um and that the physical
universe is the manifest body of this
genius of this creative intelligence. So
that the world that we're living in is
the physical body of the divine. And
nothing I'm going to say here is new.
It's the cosmology that emerges in
psychedelics is essentially the same
cosmology that emerges in the great
mystical traditions of classical uh
contemplative cultures. So there's
nothing new. It's just a different
technique, a different trigger protocol
for accessing some of these dimensions
of consciousness. So that all existence
is unified in a fundamental one. Oneness
is kind of the one of the core teachings
that emerges over and over again. Uh you
can enter into oneness so deeply that
you enter into a condition that the
Buddhists call shunata emptiness of self
or anata nirvana. The self is blown out.
And when you are empty of self deeply
you experience the entire world is also
empty of cells. And if you experience
the world as completely empty of
separate individual existences, then
within a
differentiation of a physical universe,
the entire universe lives and breathes
as one as Plutinus said. So just and you
can enter the opportunity to enter into
intimacy with this consciousness to to
meet it on these special days and to be
engaged by this consciousness and go
deeper and deeper and deeper into this
consciousness. And so I'll mention in
this context I I didn't have much
contact with individual spirit guides or
individual deities or individual forms.
uh my and it's not that I don't think
these things exist. It just hasn't been
my
experience and I think it's partly
because of the protocol I used and
because of the qualities of LSD as a
psychedelic that it was grinding me up
so fine and spreading my dust so deeply
into these layers of reality that
transcend
individual life beings. So that I had
many experiences of being at different
levels but not many experiences of
individual beings. So part of it is just
the loving the communion that this
intelligence is just
extraordinary. Uh and also this oneness
this
being is loving beyond measure. When I
have been tapped into the love that this
being that brought this being to create
and share its existence in this form,
the love is overwhelming and that really
surprised me because I was okay. I was
expecting you know the creative
intelligence to be intelligent but I was
surprised by how much love was present.
Uh and so when people talk about love is
the primary virtue, I mean I understand
that. I mean that really does. I learned
that our participation in creation is
taking place over hundreds of thousands
of years, hundreds of thousands of
years. We that reincarnation is a simple
fact of life. And that because
reincarnation is a fact of life, we are
not timelmited in our development. We
have to have an understanding of our
spiritual understanding should recognize
that it's not what happens in any one
particular life which is paramount and
it's not over at the end of any one life
but it's an ongoing progression that
takes us back and forth between spirit
and matter over and over again over and
over again in an evolutionary exercise
that isn't I don't think it doesn't
culminate in enlightenment even the
classic vision is you get better and
better and clearer and clearer until
eventually you achieve realization. you
achieve enlightenment and once you
achieve enlightenment you can leave you
you transcend samsara the cycles of
existence you can permanently go to some
off-planet spiritual
paradise but I don't think that's my at
least what I've been shown and told is
it that's not really the project and
that's an understandable interpretation
from our early experience when we first
make contact several thousand years ago
with this profound mother universe with
the spiritual mother universe. It's an
understandable cont in uh
conclusion because this universe is so
beautiful and so ecstatic and and it
feels so much like home. Naturally, we
think that we want to be there. We
belong there. We came from there. And it
leads to the the religions of return. So
that it's all about transcending the
limits of human condition and returning
to where we came from, where we belong,
which generates up and out cosmologies.
Uh and I think that's a reflection not
of the way the world is but of our early
understanding of the world which is now
deepening. Now that we have a better
understanding of how huge the universe
is and how long it's been in existence,
then we if you really want to understand
life, you have to begin to think like
God. You have to think like a galaxy and
understand that the the creative
intelligence thinks in terms of billions
and billions of years. It doesn't think
in terms of individuals so much as it
thinks of whole species, whole planetary
systems, galactic systems. And we have
to allow ourselves to expand to
understand what is our role in such a
universe. And reincarnation allows us to
do that. Reincarnation helps us
understand not only the tensions that
are woven into the body that we have and
the mind that we have, but it also
weaves us, it gives us an invitation to
participate more fully into the divine
project. So that the goal becomes to
achieve realization to achieve some deep
experiential grounding of our of our
understanding our experience of our true
essential nature which is underneath our
personality nature.
But then once we have that, once we
understand that, once we understand that
every living thing is grounded in that
same reality, that the essence of my
individuality is the same as the essence
of everybody else's individuality. We're
all in this together. Then the goal
becomes, I think, to progressively
integrate more and more and more
spiritual reality into our physical
incarnation so that we can truly bring
heaven to earth. That we can truly
transform our physical world into a
paradise. And we and not in a
metaphorical sense, but I mean in a
literal sense that we eventually will
become a species of awakened beings, a
species of enlightened beings, a species
of saved beings and a species of
enlightened
beings creates a different earth than a
species of unenlightened beings. So the
size of the project, the communion, the
opportunity to enter into communion with
the project. Reincarnation is true.
Reincarnation leads to a different
story, a different anthropology, if you
will, of the whole creative endeavor. U
those are, I guess, some of the
highlights of the the large ideas that
stand
out. And as I said, they're not new.
These are all wellestablished in our
classic mystical traditions and yet we
seem to need to continue to hear them
over and over and over again. We do. Or
some of us apparently need to. Yeah. I
think it I feel like I need to. Me too.
Me too. You know, and I think one of the
the differences it's sometimes said that
the age of individual enlightenment is
over. Now it's collective enlightenment.
That is a challenge we face because and
I think that's really true
and the 2,000 or so years of individual
enlightenment or individual salvation
perfectly well understandable. But now
if we don't if the whole species doesn't
awaken we likely won't be able to
survive on this planet. We have to grow
up. We have to stop being egoic children
and we have to grow up into our soul
consciousness and our deeper spiritual
nature otherwise we're going to lose the
planet.
I have a question from Pablo Geralda
who's one of our volunteers.
Uh Pablo is in Argentina and he asks you
Chris if you have advice for somebody
who wants to try psychedelics for the
first time and what are are there legal
ways to do it? He's asking and another
viewer Gracie Slick uh raises the
question, how do you acquire LSD? To my
knowledge uh it's illegal everywhere in
the United States. And so then there's a
question of obviously there is a a
market for it but the the question is
how do you know what you're getting?
Absolutely. First and I do not want to
encourage people to break the law. I
mean it's just let's be careful here.
This is I I would not want anyone to
break the law and get in trouble doing
something like this. There are people
who want to work with Iawaska and they
will go to Peru or to Brazil uh to work
with in Iawaska communities in Santi Da
or Uni Yuno de Vegetital there are
iawaska communities in the United States
now which have won the right uh to use
Iawasa in spiritual context. They've won
the right from the Supreme Court uh to
do this. uh they are not plentiful but
they are here. Um among the psychedelics
um ketamine is the only one that's legal
right now. Uh the MDMA which is an
impathogen more than a strict
psychedelic but it's important
therapeutic instrument got turned down
uh just last year. Uh but it'll be here.
It'll be coming back. It will be made
legal probably within three years.
Psilocybin won't be far behind. So
what's legal
now and what's legal in 10 years will be
very different even five years. So the
number of psychedelics that one might be
able to use is increasing in the years
to come. How do you know whether what
you've gotten is pure? And that's really
an important issue because you do not
want street drugs are filled with all
sorts of contaminants that you do not
want to put into your system. And but
you can send these to labs um sponsored
by the federal government. You can send
them anonymously to be tested and you'll
be told what's in them. And so you can
check and verify at the state level or
the federal level what it is that you've
got here, what you're taking and how
strong it is. Um,
so, uh, yeah. And as far as procuring
it, no comment or that's up to each
person to find a path themselves maybe.
Yeah, no comment. Uh, because there you
can grow mushrooms. You can learn how to
grow mushrooms. I mean, you can create
your own psilocybin mushrooms. Uh and
there is of course a clear underground
throughout the country which uh some of
them is some of many much of it is very
irresponsible in terms of impurities and
but some of the people are very
conscientious about this uh but still uh
you have to proceed with caution and
always test what you have. Yeah.
Right. Here's a question from first
deacon Gemini. They ask, "What is the
difference between ego death and
disassociation or
derealization? Both entail detachment
and depending on the person, it can feel
good, bad, or neutral.
Yeah. Well, I'm not a psychologist, so
take what I say on derealization with a
grain of salt here. uh I understand that
to be uh a psychological experience or
condition in which you feel yourself to
be um dissolving or not grounded in your
real or conventional identity. Um and it
is some it's often associated with
various forms of
psychopathology because if it becomes
endemic it it undermines your capacity
to function as a strong individual
within the world. Um ego death is sort
of similar to that uh but different. Um
it's sometimes said you have to have a
strong ego for to go through ego death
to have a good ego death. Um ego death
is
basically a let me back
up. If you are grounded in the way most
people are in our bodily consciousness
in a consciousness which basically
reflects the history of this body in in
this time reality. If you begin to open
up into deeper spiritual
realities then sooner or later you have
to let go of your egoic identity your
body mind identity to begin to have
access to these deeper broader states
where the ego doesn't have a function.
Um, in mystical traditions, in classic
contemplative traditions, the death of
self is well known and recognized. It's
it's
usually achieved through a lifestyle of
compassion, a lifestyle of service, a
lifestyle of of
generosity, prayer, practicing, uh,
spiritual practice, contemplative
practice. It's a slow gradual softening
of the heart and an opening up to kind
of an infusion of divine flux which is
always there. It's always pressing it
upon us. We just the ego keeps it out.
So if you kind of sacrifice the ego and
take it apart through generosity,
selflessness, um acts of of prayer,
you're making a transition from a
consciousness which is time space
grounded, bodily grounded into a
consciousness which is more mystical,
more open. What happens in a psychedelic
session is the same process but it's
accelerated and intensified.
uh
if I'm thinking now I'm a professor of
religious studies so I've always held
the spiritual traditions in the back of
my mind while I'm doing psychedelic work
and to me I've always approached
psychedelic work as a spiritual practice
even though the goal of my work was kind
of different it wasn't awakening so much
as it was cosmological exploration but
basically taking the lessons that we've
learned learned about how to become a
more spiritually attuned person from the
spiritual traditions and taking that
into the psychedelic context. And in the
psychedelic context where you are very
powerfully activating deeper levels of
awareness which open up the floodgates
in a way to this deeper spiritual
reality.
You reach a point where uh the ego is
put under pressure and it just it just
ruptures it. You you can't contain
consciousness within the structure of
your ego. And when you get a lot of
people, a lot of psychologists, a lot of
exercise, a lot of ink and sweat over
the complexity and strength and
durability of the ego. But from a
spiritual perspective, when you get
right down to it, it's not that hard to
take it apart.
uh you really can just break it apart.
And when I went through my my major ego
death experience, the universe just
snapped me like a twig. Uh it didn't
involve derealization, but it involved a
frightening
confrontation because I was turned into
something which was the exact opposite
of everything I had always known myself
to be. I had always known myself to be a
man, to be an intellectual, to be white,
uh to be passionately concerned with the
meaning of existence. In this critical
session, I was turned into the opposite
of this. I was turned into women. I was
turned into women of color, women who
had no philosophical expectations or
interests at all. And it was the perfect
hell for male academic philosopher. It
scared the beeas out of me. And then
when I let go and I allowed myself to
become these women,
then first I was immediately relaxed and
I was taken under the arm of the great
mother and taken into an extraordinary
journey into the lives of women into
hundreds and hundreds of
women. And then after the session was
over, as I was coming back, my male
identity reasserted itself. because I
like being a man. But I knew that my
masculinity and my whiteness and my
intellectual would never confine me the
way it had confined me before. The the
problem wasn't of women, of course, or
or the anti- the non-intellectual
issues. The problem was the the tight
fit that my social identity had on my
consciousness and that had to be broken.
It was as if the universe was saying to
me, "Listen, where you're going, gender
does not exist. Let go." And that's when
I let go. And I went into states of
consciousness that don't differentiate
between male and female. And then
eventually going into states of
consciousness which don't differentiate
between human and non-human. All right?
And then going into states of
consciousness which go beyond space and
time entirely. So it ego death is just
that that kind of rupture which can be
slow or fast depending on what method
you're using to let go of
your preoccupation with self you know
the Tibetans call it
self-clinging you know and we can see
self- clinging when you look at a
picture the group picture like a class
picture and where does your eye go your
eye kind of goes quick to where you are
in the picture you
That's a symptom of self-cleing. It's
that constant self-referencing into your
own life experience which is
understandable from one perspective but
so sad from another perspective. All
right. So it's like if uh if you take it
if you think of the ego like an ice cube
and you put an ice cube next to a
candle, it melts very slowly. It drips
and melts down. And I think this is like
what happens in contemplative practice
where you melt this ego slowly. But if
you take the same ice cube and you throw
it on a hot iron cast iron skillet, it
jumps around and it melts faster, but it
explodes and bounces all over the place.
And I think that's kind of like how ego
death manifests itself in psychedelic
sessions. So there's not a right way or
a wrong way, but the pattern is that we
have to let go of the confines of these
bars that keep us imprisoned in our
self-referential existence.
Yeah.
And do you feel that the ego serves any
purpose since we all seem to have it or
is it just something to be dissolved or
eliminated or accepted and then
transformed or however yeah that
happens? You know, I think ego gets a
bad w in many spiritual uh traditions
and I think the the ego and by that I
mean our individual ex identity, our
individual body mind identity uh it's a
beautiful thing. It's really it's
magnificent and I think it's a
cosmologically important thing. I think
it's one of the major gifts that we are
given by entering into time
space. Now a number of spiritual
traditions again in the kind of the
classic schools they say well the goal
is to destroy ego lose ego and to return
to God. So it's like a drop of water
that returns to the ocean. When the drop
goes back to the ocean it doesn't exist
anymore. And and that's that the
vidantic picture is you basically
eliminate ego so that you can live the
life divine but you just live the life
divine no longer as an individual. You
just surrender completely and become the
divine. And I don't think that's an
adequate cosmology. Uh I think that
um I think that the creative
intelligence has created a system whi
which first of all we have a life as
individ as an individual and we we
explore and deepen and expand this
individual experience lifetime after
lifetime after lifetime. And the goal is
not to uh completely abandon our
individuality, but the goal is
to is to
engage what is left out of the e
individual ego's experience to engage
the tremendous power of consciousness,
the love that runs through existence,
the intelligence that runs through
existence. So that you were both an
individual, but you are all now
transparent to the divine condition. I
don't think individuality is destroyed
when you go deeper and deeper. I think
it's actually transformed. And I think
individuality is truly one of the great
gifts of the mother. It's one of the
great gifts of time space existence.
And I think if you study the biographies
of the autobiographies or biographies of
great spiritual adepts of of great
masters you find that they are
individual you know they are they are
quite distinctive individual. So
enlightenment is about anata no self but
it doesn't mean that your individuality
is shattered irrevocably and doesn't
come back. If that's happening then
that's a kind of a form of
psychopathology even spiritual
pathology.
I think healthy spiritual maturity is
you have individual experience. You have
your individual reference point, but
you're not imprisoned within that
reference point. You build bridges. You
you connect and receive this. You you
care about more than just yourself. You
care about more than just your species.
You care about more than just your
generation. And you live large. You
know, you're an individual, but you're
living a much larger life. Yeah. you you
recognize the interconnectedness and
perhaps can merge with that and that
really seems to be a definition of yoga
is union with the divine perhaps. Yes.
Yeah. Union with the divine and not
dissolving irrevocably so that you don't
have an individual awareness or
individuality. Yeah.
Thank you for all of these answers,
Chris. And we just want to let our
viewers and listeners know that we are
over 60 minutes in. We've got about 25
minutes left of the live stream. Here's
a question from a viewer whose YouTube
name is
Fabius who says, "How can we reconcile
the ideal of transforming earth into a
paradise with the spiritual necessity of
contrast and suffering as essential
conditions for learning and growth in
the human experience?"
Great question. Good question. you know
that the question of suffering is a a
profound question and that we could take
the whole program just to explore that
particular topic. I mean if there is if
the creative intelligence is an
intelligence and it's loving how could
we how could it possibly have tolerated
let alone manifested a world which is so
painful which which is which terrible
things happen uh at a very organic level
uh let alone a social level and I think
in order in order to really understand
and to even have an attempt to compreh
rehend suffering. We have to develop a
very long time horizon. We have to look
deep into the workings of the universe
and we have to sort of adopt a galactic
perspective. Uh and I think this is
important to understand that the human
species is a radically unfinished
species. It's a very incomplete species.
And so if you think well how young are
we? I mean, are we kind of like, you
know, on one to 100, are we 95% finished
or are we 5% finished? You know, and I
think we're maybe more like five or 10%
finished. We just woke up. I mean, 5,000
4,000 years ago, we just woke up to this
underlying level of consciousness that
we've begun to recognize in the
religious traditions. This universe has
been building this world for 3.7 billion
years. And we're just waking up in this
universe and just coming to understand
and to engage in it consciously rather
than
unconsciously. And the capacities that
we see in the highest most spiritually
realized individuals.
the capacity of not only compassion but
the capacity to have control over their
own physical process and even the
capacity to have to change matter around
them to manipulate matter as some of the
great mahasidas have the capacity to do.
we see in those beings the symptoms or
the qualities that are emerging are
emergent qualities in spirit in beings
who are integrating more and more
spiritual capacity inside this physical
body. So if we look to the future and we
ask what is what are we becoming? What
is the project? The project is not human
beings as they exist in the 21st
century. The project is how human beings
will exist in the 23rd, 25th, 3, 30th
century, 40th century. And in that
context
suffering Yeah. I don't want to I don't
want
to a lot of people who are listening who
are watching have suffered greatly in
their life. We've all suffered and some
of us have suffered deeply and
profoundly in our life and I do not mean
to make light of that in any way in
anything that I would say. uh but
suffering is part of the crucible within
which we are learning and on this planet
and suffering has individual roots
sometimes in our individual karma of the
past bad choices we've made but
suffering also has collective roots.
Sometimes the suffering that we engage
in this life is not because of anything
that we've done personally but it's
because of where the collective is where
the herd is. It's it's a suffering which
is generated by a common denominator of
the of the learning of the human
species. We are just in the early stages
of of really understanding the full
power of our nature of our true and
essential nature. And the goal of this
access to this deep nature is not simply
to be happy and and to be relaxed and to
be comfortable, but it's literally to to
transform our experience of being an
incarnation of spiritual being. So that
the goal is to increasingly change the
conditions of our life so that we are
literally living not only a spiritually
relaxed and comfortable and and and good
existence but that we are able we are
gradually changing the conditions of our
physical existence. uh I think they'll
in the future we will see uh we will
have more control over our body's
diseases and more ability to intervene
in the diseases of the body and to
produce a healthier and healthier body.
I think we'll be seeing all sorts of
traits that we consider miraculous
becoming increasingly natural and
manifest.
And I think when we come to this pivot,
when we go through the pivot that I
think we're coming into, you know, I
have a chapter in the book on the birth
of the future human, I think we have
entered a a really critical pivot point
in the human story. We are being taken
into the next level of our human
evolution.
uh I think we will see a significant
amelioration of our collective
suffering as we make this transition. I
think we are going towards a period
where individually and
collectively a world of less suffering,
a world of greater joy, a world of
greater spiritual empowerment uh and
physical ease as we go forward and as we
go through this transition. This is just
the next iteration of an evolutionary
story which has been going on for
hundreds, millions of years, billions of
years and will continue to go on for
millions, billions of years for. So in
order to understand why we suffer, we
have to if we really want to understand,
we have to go very very deep. We have to
go deep into the divine intention. We
have to go deep and open up a very very
large vision of history. even if we're
going to begin to have a chance of
understanding why existence is so hard.
Well, if I could follow up um with a
related question, the the previous
question was sort of the paradox of the
necessity of suffering and as compared
to the goal of establishing uh more of a
paradise on earth. Another paradox to me
seems to be the idea that you've
expressed that consciousness is
fundamental. It's primary. It's it's the
foundation of all uh existence. Yeah.
And yet it's through a chemical
substance that you got there which would
lead a lot of materialists to say see
ahu it's consciousness is nothing more
than a product of chemistry. Yeah. And
the same thing happens if you just sit
on a meditation cushion for long periods
of time and become an increasingly
proficient uh and in that form. We can
now monitor the brain wave patterns and
we can even explore the biochemistry of
meditative states of consciousness and
we can say the same thing. See it's
biochemistry and electrical you know
waveforms in the brain which are
actually inducing this. But that really
kind of uh doesn't really solve the
problem does it? Because uh it that that
is the application of a particular
metaphysical worldview of materialism.
And there if we want to probe that
worldview, we can find lots of
counteremon that's an inadequate
worldview. It was an adequate worldview
in the 18th 19th century when we got
into it. But it's not an adequate
worldview to handle the wide range of
experiences that occur in lots of
different contexts. Parasychological
research, psychedelic research,
different, you know, near-death episode
research, reincarnation research, all of
that undermine, if you're really paying
attention, the the plausibility of the
metaphysic of the metaphysics of
materialism. So, but it is an ironic
thing that we have this chemical
substance which interacts with our body
in a way that seems to open us to it
opens the floodgates of our uh well see
I I tend to think of the mind as kind of
a more like a transceiver. It is a gate
controller. Uh and so it changes the
gate structure. uh it kind of puts our
default mode network and allow into
quiescence and it allows us to
temporarily have states of awareness
that go beyond the default mode network.
Um but it we that kind of mechanism is
subject to different
interpretations if we apply a m a
materialist interpretation or if we imp
uh bring to it uh a
non-materialist spiritual perspective in
which we can understand human existence.
The way I understand a human being is
that we are living at a synthesis. We
are a synthesis of two different systems
to be very si simply between a spiritual
reality and a physical reality. They are
always
intertwined. We are we are living them
continuously. If we survive the
destruction of our body, it's not
because of something that happens to us
when we die. It's because of something
that we already are. We already are
living with one foot in two worlds. And
we know that if we shift the balance, we
can open ourselves to that spiritual
dimension without leaving our physical
body. And we can do it through any
number of different contemplative
practices and yogic practices. We can
also do it using uh s using some of the
ancient uh sacred medicines and the
tradition. That doesn't prove
materialism. It just proves again if we
start with a model that we are a
synthesis of two metaphysical systems
then we can explain all the phenomena
and more of the phenomena than
materialism can
explain. Yeah.
Here's a question from my husband
Xander. And as humans we have a sensory
system and a motor system through which
you mentioned it with the brain. That's
the central nervous system and some
refer to that as being a filter of
consciousness. And he asks if you had
sinesthetic experiences, what sense or
senses were most
active? So senesthesia where maybe you
like hear smells or taste vision or
you know I'm not in a good position to
answer that question. I'm afraid Xander
I just
u because those kind of experiences are
not are not do not figure largely in my
experience. So I haven't thought about
them a lot. I haven't studied them very
much.
Um I don't when I've taken psychedelics
I don't hallucinate on them. I mean, I'm
always wrapped up with eye shades and
whatnot, but even when I've taken the
eye shades off, I don't have visual
distortions in my world around me. If I
had stayed in touch with physical
reality, I'm sure I would have and then
I might have had some of the experiences
you're referring to. But if you
internalize your experience completely,
you
engage conscious reality and then you're
on a conscious experience. And I see
many things and I experience many
things, but I don't experience them as
kind of a a permutation or distortion of
my physical sensation.
It's kind of like I just let go of
physical sensation and I just plunge
into uh the conscious the tunnel of
consciousness and go there. Now, I'm
sure there's a good answer to your
question, and I'm sure of people uh
maybe even people on this podcast right
now who would be able to give you a good
answer to that question. I'm just afraid
I'm not one of them. Well, I think he's
had those experiences and that's why he
was curious if that's something you you
had also experienced. Yeah. Yeah. The
permeability between uh our senses shows
up in several different contexts. I know
it shows up in shamanic drumming for
example the the different fluidity
there. Uh we are such a complex being
this blending of spirit and matter uh it
shows up at very broad levels and it
shows up at very micro levels in our
sensation. Yeah.
Yeah. Here's a question from a viewer
named Corey Berdick who asks, "What are
some of the most powerful or inspiring
examples of the emergence of the new
human?"
[Music]
Well, I think when we see somebody who's
willing to lay down his life for others,
that's an extraordinary example. When we
see people who spend their entire life
working to help other people and they
they they
bypass putting their energy towards
enhancing their life and they invest all
their energy in helping other people
live a full and rich life. Those are
symptoms of the of the future human. The
way I understand the future human I'll
step aside for just a second and come
back to the focus.
We've been
incarnating for thousands and thousands,
hundreds of thousands of years. We've
been
incarnating and the pattern in our
religious structures has sort of seen a
linear development in our reincarnation.
You know, we go backwards, we go
forward, but basically making a linear
development in so that we become
eventually more compassionate, more
intelligent, more creative, so on so
forth.
But I think at least as it's as it's
been shown to me and as I've been taken
into it, I think we are coming to a time
of history in general and people
individually where well let me just say
how it happened to me. I reached a point
in one of my sessions when all of my
former lives started coming into me. And
I had done years of past life therapy
work, so I was familiar with some of my
former lives. But they began to come
into me. I could feel them entering me.
And it was like wrapping a filament of
white light around a a kite spool. And
after a certain period, they seemed to
fuse. And when they fuse, there was an
tremendous explosion of energy and I was
catapulted into a state of consciousness
in which I was an
individual. But I was an individual
beyond any frame of reference that I had
known
before. And this is what I came to call
the birth of the diamond soul or the
birth of the
soul. And then I was given a series of
teachings that was explaining what
happened, what was happening. And I
think I was being shown that this is
what happens to a species that
reincarnates as we in reincarnate. We
come to a point where there's a long
period of individual development of
linear development. But there comes a
point where it's just natural that all
of our former
lives achieve a synthesis of the soul.
Now this synthesis exists in spiritual
reality. When we die, we return to soul
consciousness. We return to the
consciousness that holds all of our
former lives. And then we incarnate, we
get narrow. We die, we get large. We
incarnate, we get narrow. And if we keep
this up for a few thousands of years,
sooner or later, doesn't it make sense
that the soul, the whole soul, the
100,000year-old being incarnates in a
physical incarnation. So that the
consciousness that lives in that body is
not a consciousness that ever is tempted
to think of him or herself as a
hundred-year-old being. But it's it's
natural consciousness is aware that is
an ancient being and it has ancient
relationships with all these beings. It
has been male, female, rich, poor,
black, white, every possible
permutation. All of those live within
us. But when they achieve a synthesis
when they become one then there is this
explosion of
identity and I think that this is what
is happening to the planet right now. We
are undergoing a spiritual process where
we are transitioning from egoic identity
to soul identity. We are growing up out
of our
childish egoic past into a mature self
where we
are we are learning to we are basically
becoming incarnate diamond souls and I
think we can see this in some of the
great spiritual masters of history that
they are different from ordinary people
and but the difference is that they are
bigger older deeper they are
distillation ations of the soul.
So what are the what are the symptoms of
I think the soul emerging in history it
doesn't happen like all at once or
something dramatic it happens gradually
and slowly in diff all sorts of
different ways and so the symptoms are
when you see people who take the long
view who really see the seven
generations consider the seven
generations of impact of one's actions
when you have the wide view when they
are naturally their compassion expends
extends to whole classes of people. When
we see the Gandhis of the world or the
Martin Luther Kings of the world, people
who live their lives in service of other
people trying to lift other people, help
other people along. You see it in the in
the music teacher who's teaching fifth
graders year after year after year
sharing his or her musical knowledge to
give that musical knowledge to others so
that they can enrich their life and go
forward. So I I think we see the
symptoms of an older soul or the new
human when we see symptoms of great
compassion, great vision, great service,
selflessness. And we can see we can
recognize those around us without
necessarily understanding what we what
we were seeing. What we're seeing is the
soul emerging in that in that life form
in that life being. And I think that we
are coming to a time in history where we
have to grow up into the soul's
consciousness and just there's a
synergistic relationship as the world is
trying to become one to solve the
problems that it has generated. The soul
is trying to become one. And because we
have the history of the world inside our
soul as the world ch basically deals
with all the ways it's divided life into
bits and pieces and preferring some
people and dis discouraging other
people. We have all these tensions
inside of us. And so that there's a
synergistic relationship between us
trying to become one and whole within
ourselves and the world trying to become
one and whole. And I think we are being
guided into the transformation which
will not be easy. I think it's going to
be very painful where we're going. But
we are coming into labor. We've been
just dating the future human for
hundreds of thousands of years.
Gestation is long. Labor is short. And I
think we're coming into labor. We have
to
deliver the soul into history. We have
to grow up. And I think we will. I mean,
I think we will make this transition. A
lot of serious people think that we
won't. That it's we're in we are an
extinct species. We're just living on
borrowed time. But my experience is that
we do make this transition. We will make
it. It will be very painful. But we will
give birth to the soul in history.
Well, that's beautifully put and uh it's
probably a good note to close our live
stream on. Chris, it's been a real joy
to be with you. Emmy, do you have any
concluding thoughts?
I just want to say thank you
for the hope and inspiration. And it
sounds like you possibly were given
precognitive information in your LSD
sessions and that you have some type of
wisdom or knowledge not only for
yourself but also for the collective and
because you're right there are a lot of
people who feel like we might be
devolving and things are going really
south. I'm not thrilled to hear about
the pain coming up, but uh hopefully we
can take some of these spiritual
practices and maybe ameliate some of
that.
I think we can I think we can either go
through this kicking and screaming and
hurting a lot or we can go through it
being more proactive uh with more
foresight and and in a cooperative
relationship with what's coming. And
what I've been describing is nothing
unique to me. It these ideas about the
transition comes up in indigenous
people's tradition. It comes up in the
lives of mystics and meditators. So you
know it it comes up in those who work in
deep yungian you know type of
psychotherapy. There's nothing unique to
my perception. There's nothing really
unique to psychedelics about it. It's
just that I think there are
precognitive aspects to this type of
work which is when you let go of your
personal identity, you open to the life
of your species. And just as you can
have insights into your personal
trajectory, you can also have true
insights into this trajectory of your
species. It's just a very natural thing.
And many people have had these insights.
Many people see what we're coming into.
And I think we will make it. And I think
my concern is how many of our children
would die before we make it.
Well, and it's nice to hear more people
such as yourself bring these insights.
So the more spiritually evolved people
we have, it sounds like the better,
which is perhaps one of the main reasons
we continue to do these programs on new
thinking aloud. Yeah, I think there are
many bodhicattas in the world, including
the people behind this program working
on behalf of the good of the whole.
That's the essence of the bodhicattva.
And there are many with us now today.
Yeah.
Well, once again, Chris, uh, thank you
so much for being with Emmy and I and
with the New Thinking Alloud audience
today. and Emmy, thank you once again
for the wonderful job you do as co-host
on New Thinking
Aloud. I'd like to remind our viewers
that uh you can subscribe for free to
our weekly newsletter. You can download
for free the first eight issues of the
New Thinking Aloud
magazine. and uh we hope that you
continue to enjoy the videos that we
post daily on the New Thinking Aloud
channel.
Thank you so much for being with us,
Chris. No, thank both of you for this
wonderful conversation. I enjoyed it
very much. Thank you for your work. Our
pleasure. And for those of you watching
or listening, thank you for being with
us because you are the reason that we
are here.